H.M. CORONER FOR THE INNER SOUTH DISTRICT OF
GREATER LONDON
HM Assistant Deputy Coroner, Sir Michael Wright
Inquest into the death of Jean-Charles de Menezes
Rule 43 Report
Introduction
1. This report is prepared pursuant to Rule 43 of the Coroners Rules 1984, as
amended by the Coroners (Amendment) Rules 2008. In essence, it contains
my views on which Metropolitan Police systems and practices have been
shown by the evidence in this Inquest to call for review.
2. Rule 43(1) provides as follows :
'Where ­
(a) a coroner is holding an inquest into a person 's death;
(b) the evidence gives rise to a concern that circumstances creating
a risk of other deaths will occur, or will continue to exist, in the
future; and
(c) in the coroner's opinion, action should be taken to prevent the
occurrence or continuance of such circumstances, or to
eliminate or reduce the risk of death created by such
circumstances,
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK • SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
2
the coroner may report the circumstances to a person who the coroner
believes may have power to take such action.'
It should be noted ~ h a t the Rule enables a C_Q!.JtneI~Q _dra w_attention-l: O-- _
circumstances which did not actually cause the death of the particular
deceased person with whom his inquest is con cerned.
3. As requ ired by Rule 43(3), I made an announcement at the end of the Inqu est
that I intended to make a Rule 43 Report to the Com missioner of Police of the
Metropolis and to the Metropolitan Police Authority ['MPA'], and that I
intend ed to copy it to the Home Secretary. Thi s Report is also being sent to
the Lord Chancellor and to all those wh o were reco gnised as Properly
Interested Persons with in the meaning of Rule 19. It will be for the Lord
Chancellor to decid e whether to publish the Report and whether to send a copy
to any other person. At the end of the Inquest, I expressed the opini on that the
Report should be published at some stage. At present, this Report is provided
to Prop erly Interested Person s on a confidential basi s.
4. Within 56 days of the date of this Report, the Commissioner and the MPA are
required to 'provide a written respons e containing (a) details of any action that
has been taken or which it is proposed will be taken in response to the report
or otherwise; or (b) an explanation as to why no action is proposed '. See Rule
43A(l). An application can be made to me to ext end that deadline. Within
the same 56-day time-scale, the Commissioner and the MPA are entitled to
make representations to me as to whether their response(s) should be
published to Properly Interested Persons.
5. In preparing this Rep ort, I have had regard to all the evidence given in the
course of the Inquest. I have also conside red further material which was
provided to me by the Metropolitan Police Serv ice [' MPS '] concerning how
their practices have dev eloped since the events under investigation at the
Inquest (July 2005). In parti cular, Commander Stewart prepared an extremely
thorou gh statement with extensive supporting materials. Those documents
were provided to all other Properly Interested Persons. As well as the
THE COR ONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWAR K' SE1 1YD
PH ONE: 020 7 52 5 6363 • FAX : 0 20 7 525 635 6
3
evidence and those additional materials, I have taken into account the
conclusions of the Jury. They answered a number of questions, and some of
their answers suggest that systemic failures OCCUlTed.
6. It is the purpose of this Report to identify points of concern, not to prescribe
specific solutions. That is best done by those who have the difficult task of
overseeing policing in general and anti-terrorist operations in particular. This
Report addresses the practices in use in July 2005. It is apparent from
Commander Stewart's statement that the MPS has made efforts to resolve a
number of the problems which are identified in this Report, but also that some
matters remain to be addressed. I am in no position to comment on the likely
effectiveness of any reforms which have been, or are to be, implemented.
(1) Command Structure
7. The Command Structure adopted for the operation on nnd July 2005 was
repeatedly criticised as lacking clarity and being open to misunderstanding. In
part, this was probably because the MPS was facing an unprecedented
situation; a series of unsuccessful attempts at suicide attacks on the transport
system. There were three strands to its operations: (i) the investigation of the
crime; (ii) the operation to catch the bombers; and (iii) the effort to prevent
further detonations by the suspects or others.
(a) Gold / Silver / Bronze Structure
8. As in most major operations, the Gold / Silver / Bronze command structure
model was used. However, in this case, it was unclear precisely to what extent
the Gold Commander was required to supervise the operation after setting his
strategy. There was also argument in the Inquest as to the freedom of the
Silver Commander to adjust or refine the Gold strategy. The ACPO Manual
on Police Use of Firearms (at ChA, para. 3.6) lists a series of duties for the
Gold Commander, including a duty to keep the strategy under review and a
duty to document any changes. The MPS might usefully review the command
structure and the Manual, and consider whether there can be further
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK • SE1 1YD
PHONE : 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
4
clarification of the continuing role played by the Gold Commander after
setting his strategy.
(b) Maintenance of Chain ofCommand
9. On the night of 21sr / n nd July 2005 , there was a period when the Gold
Commander was absent and a period when both the Senior Investigating
Officer in the manhunt and his Deputy were absent. These absences were
necessary for the individuals to get some rest, and the control room was
manned over the entire period. Nevertheless, some consideration should be
given to ensuring that, in major operations, the chain of command is
maintained when a Gold or Silver Commander is absent (eg. by nominating
interim replacements).
(c) DSO
10. The command structure referred to was further adapted by the involvement of
a Designated Senior Officer ['DSO']. This post was developed to ensure that
an appropriate officer should be charged with giving a 'critical shot'
authorisation in operations mounted against suicide terrorists. It is apparent
that the DSO plays a different role when directing a response to a
'spontaneous' report from a member of the public, as compared with the role
he plays when involved in a 'pre-planned' or 'intelligence-led' operation.
However, in all cases, it is important that all officers should know (i) when the
DSO b ecomes involved in commanding an operation and (ii) precisely what
command role he performs. Is the DSO to assume command from the start, or
only to step in when an armed intervention is required?
(2) Communications Systems
11. The Jury concluded that the following factors (among others) contributed to
the death ofMr de Menezes:
THE CORONERS COURT · 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK ' SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6 363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
5
• 'The fact that the views of the surveillance officers regarding
identification were not accurately communicated to the command team
and the firearms officers.' [Factor (f) in the Inquisition]
• 'The fact that the position of the cars containing the firearms officers
was not accurately known to the command team as the firearms
officers were approaching Stockwell Station.' [Factor (g) in the
Inquisition]
• 'Any significant shortcomings in the communications system as it was
operating on the day between the various teams on the ground and
New Scotland Yard.' [Factor (h) in the Inquisition]
12. A number of particular concerns arose during the course of the Inquest
regarding communications systems. Some of these may have been addressed,
as lessons have been learned and as technology has improved. I also recognise
that some of the details of how the police have developed their
communications systems may well be sensitive.
(a) Radio Operation and Maintenance
13. There were a number of difficulties in operating specific police radios on the
morning of 22nd July 2005. These affected the surveillance team and the
firearms team (especially motorcycle officers). These problems required
surveillance officers to use impromptu relay systems and one firearms car
radio to be repaired in the course of the operation.
(b) Radio Coverage above Ground
14. The Cougar radio system suffered from poor coverage and radio 'black spots' .
A number of officers commented on the extremely poor signal they had.
Many resorted to using mobile telephones to communicate with each other, an
expedient which occupied valuable time in obtaining telephone numbers and
which prevented messages being transmitted to a wider range of officers.
Mobile telephones may be appropriate for confidential communications
THE CORONERS COURT' 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK' SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
6
between particular officers, but undue reliance upon them prevents messages
being heard and understood by the full range of officers involved in an
operation.
(c) Radio Coverage Underground
15. None of the radio communications systems which officers used to speak to
each other had any coverage on the London Underground system. This meant
that the command team could not direct firearms officers after they had gone
below ground at Stockwell Station.
(d) Communication between Teams
16. It is important to ensure that effective radio systems can be used to
communicate between teams from different branches of the Metropolitan
Police who are engaged in the same operation (including control room,
firearms teams and surveillance teams) .
(e) Language
17. In the course of the Inquest, there were a number of instances where police
terminology tended to confuse rather than to clarify. The word 'subject'
appeared to bear the twin meanings of 'identified suspect' and 'person under
surveillance'. The words 'intercept' and 'intervene' were said to bear distinct
meanings, but were difficult to explain with clarity. The word 'control' was
used to refer to a number of different forms of police activity, including
watching an address and restraining a person. Words such as 'stop', 'detain',
'contain' and 'deploy' were also apparently capable of being misinterpreted.
(3) Radio Discipline
18. As well as technical concerns, the Inquest highlighted two problems with radio
discipline. These may also have some bearing on the contributory factors
identified by the Jury (paragraph 11 above).
(a) The Speaker Announcing Himself
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK • SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6363 • FA X : 020 7 525 6356
7
19. There were a number of important radio communications in which the speaker
did not identify himself either by name or by reference to his team . For
example, firearms officers gave evidence that they heard important messages
concerning identification ofMr de Menezes in the period from 9.50 to 9.55am.
However, none was able to say specifically who was the speaker and the
general belief that the speaker was a surveillance officer was a matter of
assumption.
(b) Acknowledging Messages
20. There was no system whereby an officer was required to acknowledge a
message addressed to him. For example, when the leader of the Grey
surveillance team asked for a numerical confidence rating for identification of
the person under surveillance, he was met with silence, which he assumed to
be an inability to answer the question (rather than an inability to hear the
question).
(4) Location Information
21. As mentioned above, the Jury concluded that the death of Mr de Menezes was
caused in part by the fact that the position of the firearms officers was not
accurately known to the command team. They also concluded that the death
was caused in part by a failure 'to ensure that Mr de Menezes was stopped
before he reached public transport' [Factor (c)]. Both of those conclusions
draw attention to the importance of the command team having accurate
information about the location under surveillance and the position and
movements of officers.
(a) Maps in the Control Room
22. There was conflicting evidence as to whether or not maps of the area of Scotia
Road were displayed in the control room during the material part of the
operation. Guidance might usefully be given about the importance of
displaying maps and attempting to plot the approximate locations of different
teams. Of course, this may not be an exact science. Officers on the ground
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK· SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6363 • FAX : 020 7 525 6356

9
their work on the day in question. In my view, procedures for making and
communicating identifications do call for review.
(a) Terminology
27. Clear terminology ought to be used to indicate the level of confidence with
which a particular identification is made . Some evidence was given to the
effect that new practices had been introduced in this regard. It is obviously
important that, where firearms officers are to be ordered to intervene based
upon an identification of a suspect, all officers should understand the quality
of the identification which has been made.
(b) Use ofPhotographs
28. It would assist identification in many cases if a surveillance officer was able to
check a photograph of the suspect during the course of the operation. The
evidence revealed that officers were given the opportunity to take photographs
with them from their briefings, but that many chose not to do so. One officer
gave evidence that this was because of concern that the photograph might be
misplaced. Consideration should be given to advising officers to take
photographs with them unless particular circumstances dictate otherwise.
(c) Provision ofPhotographs
29. A number of allegations were made during the Inquest to the effect that the
MPS had failed to obtain and circulate the best available photographs of the
suspect, Hussain Osman. In short, the following criticisms were advanced by
the de Menezes family:
(a) that the police had failed promptly to obtain photographs of the suspect
held by the DVLA and the immigration authorities;
(b) that the police had failed to review files and photographs from
Operation Ragstone after a connection had been made between that
operation and the suspects;
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK' SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6363 • FAX : 020 7 525 6356
10
(c) that the police had failed to make use of photographs found in the
'bomb bag' discovered at one ofthe scenes ofattempted bombings.
30. The police parties argued that none of these allegations had real weight in the
circumstances of this case. At least some of their arguments had real merit.
However, it must be accepted that identification is vital in intelligence-led
operations against suspected terrorists. With that in mind, I suggest that the
following topics should be reviewed:
(a) how to ensure that other agencies can be contacted quickly (at any time
of day or night), with a view to obtaining further photographs and
information about suspects;
(b) what guidance should be given on reviewing files of related operations
with a view to obtaining furth er information on suspects ;
(c) what guidance should be given on the use of photographs obtained
from crime scenes to aid identification.
(d) Transmission of Photographs
31. Developments in technology may make it possible in future.for surveillance
officers to take photographs covertly and to transmit them to a control room.
It may also be possible in future for the control room to transmit photographs
electronically to surveillance officers, whim such photographs are obtained
during the course of the operation. It need hardly be said that such methods
could be very valuable.
(6) Rules of Engagement and Code-Words
32. Intervening against suspected suicide terrorists raises particular difficulties.
These were explained in the careful evidence of Mr Swain, the officer who
had developed the MPS policies in this area. A challenge to a suicide terrorist
will generally result in him detonating his device. The use ofbaton rounds or
THE CORONERS COURT · 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK' SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
11
tasers will often trigger the device. Therefore, a critical shot without warning
may be the only realistic tactical option, especially where the suspect has to be
confronted in a public place. Decisions on how to confront a suspect will
often have to be based on a combination of intelligence assessments by senior
officers and the exercise ofjudgment by firearms officers.
33. A number of senior officers gave evidence that it is impossible to give hard
and fast rules to firearms officers on how to confront a suspected suicide
bomber. However, the MPS had attempted to give guidance in the Operation
Kratos Firearms Officer Awareness Package (January 2003). In brief, that
document had suggested that two situations might mise:
• A person is suspected of carrying a bomb but there is some doubt on
the subject. In that situation, officers were advised to rely upon their
training and ordinarily to issue a challenge.
• 'The suspect has been confirmed as being in possession of a device
and poses an immediate threat to life.' In that situation, officers were
advised to attempt a critical shot to incapacitate the suspect
immediately. A DSO might give the authority to fire a critical shot,
but the officer on the ground would still have to make his own
independent assessment.
A Tactical Options Document prepared for the manhunt on 21st July 2005
addressed the situation where there was intelligence to suggest that a suspect
was a suicide bomber and carrying an explosive device with the means of
detonating it. In that situation, the document cautioned against overt
deployment before giving the following advice in relation to all the tactical
options available:
'In all these options there exists a real possibility that should the
subject be non-compliant with the commands of the officers initiating
the interception then an immediate critical shot may be taken in order
to protect the public and the officers engaged in that interception.'
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK' SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
12
That may be read as suggesting that a critical shot should only be fired if the
suspect fails to comply with a challenge.
(a) Rules ofEngagement
34. I suggest that the MPS review its guidance with a view to providing the
clearest and most consistent rules of engagement which can be devised . The
following topics may be considered:
(a) providing criteria, or a list of considerations, to help firearms officers
to decide whether to issue a challenge or to fire a critical shot without
warning;
(b) linking those criteria or considerations to an improved system for
designating levels of identification (see paragraph 27 above);
(c) devising practical training for firearms officers to assist them In
determining the appropriate response.
(b) Code-Words
35. The firearms officers in this case all gave evidence that they correctly
understood the order given by the DSO when they were at Stockwell.
However, it appears that, for the type of operation being performed, ther e was
no system of code-words by which a senior officer could give instructions for
firearms officers to take particular action. Such a system had been developed
for dealing with suicide bombers at 'pre-planned events', and evidence was
given that a similar system had been extended to other situations in the years
since 2005. I would endorse such a development.
(c) Communication ofIntelligence
36. Finally, the situation which arose on nnd July 2005 highlights the importance
of ensuring that intelligence is communicated to officers on the ground,
insofar as that is possible. If a firearms officer is expected to exercise his own
independent judgment before firing a critical shot, he should be kept informed
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK· SE1 1YD
PHONE : 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
13
of what is known about the suspect. It may well be impossible to provide full
information to those engaged in a fast-moving operation. On the other hand,
senior officers should not start from the premise that intelligence should not be
passed to those on the ground.
(7) Surveillance Officers / Firearms Officers
37. Although the events of 21st / nod July 2005 were unprecedented, the model of
a mobile armed support to surveillance ['MASTS'] operation was familiar to
the MPS.
(a) Joint Briefings and Joint Training Operations
38. In this case it was not possible for surveillance and firearms officers to be
briefed together. However, the case does emphasise the value of holding joint
briefings for MASTS operations, if at all possible. Such briefings should be
audio- or video-recorded if at all possible, to avoid uncertainty arising later
about their tone or content. Joint training operations involving surveillance
and firearms officers may also be of assistance in helping them to work
together.
(b) Awareness ofOther Officers
39. The facts of this case also highlight the importance of ensunng that
surveillance, firearms and arrest teams are aware of each others' presence and
position. For example, there was evidence that surveillance officers were not
informed when the firearms team was arriving near the surveillance plot, or
when that team was ordered to join the follow. Similarly, the deployment of
an SO13 arrest team appears not to have been notified in advance to
surveillance or firearms officers.
(c) Training ofSurveillance Officers
40. The Jury concluded that a failure to use surveillance officers to perform the
stop of Mr de Menezes contributed to his death [Factor (i)]. They reached that
conclusion notwithstanding evidence as to the superior training and experience
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK· SE1 1YD
PHONE: 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
14
of firealms officers. On any VIew, the senior officers in this case had to
contemplate using surveillance officers to stop a suspect. It is also clear that
the surveillance team leaders had considered the possibility of their teams
performing a stop if a suspect emerged from the address under surveillance
before firearms teams arrived. In those circumstances, consideration might
usefully be given to training at least some armed surveillance officers in how
to perform a stop of a suspected suicide terrorist.
Other Points of Concern
41 . As is clear from the statutory wording, a Rule 43 report is concerned with
circumstances which may give rise to the risk of further deaths. In this case, it
is right that I should mention two matters which probably do not strictly fall
into that category.
(a) Recording ofBriefings and Control Room Activity
42 . The Inquest had to consider numerous different contemporaneous written
records of the same briefings, decisions and instructions. Despite the
particular importance of the operation, none of those were audio- or video­
recorded. It is not my intention to suggest that all briefings or control room
activity should be recorded in this way, but consideration might be given to
recording at least some briefings and control room discussions in important
operations.
(b) Preparation ofNotes / Statements
43 . The firearms officers had all discussed the events in detail with each other
before preparing their statements and they worked on their accounts together
over a period of many hours. There was a stark difference between their
experience and the treatment of civilians, who were required to give their
accounts promptly and independently. I do not mean to criticise the officers
for acting as they did: they were following standard practice and the best
available advice. However, the result was that whole sections in some
statements directly replicated sections in other statements. Officers were
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK· SE1 1YD
PHONE : 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356
15
cross-examined on the basis that their evidence was not the product of
independent recollection. Allegations of dishonesty were made which would
have been impossible to make in the absence of collaboration.
44. Following the decision of Underhill J in R (Saunders) v [PCC [2008] EWHC
2372 Admin, ACPO has modified its guidance (see revised version of Post­
Incident Procedure Chapter 6, ACPO Manual on Police Use of Firearms (23'd
October 2008)). The new guidance recommends that, in investigations
concerning police discharge of firearms, officers should ordinarily give their
accounts as soon as practicable and without conferring with each other. It also
recommends that statements include details of any conferring which has taken
place. See paragraphs 4.1 -4.8.
45. In recent years, the Higher Courts have repeatedly expressed concern about
the practice of witnesses conferring in the preparation of their accounts.
Where police action has proved fatal, there is the additional imperative that the
resulting investigation should comply with the procedural obligation inherent
in Article 2 of the ECHR. That obligation requires the state to secure the best
evidence by a fair, independent and transparent process.
46. The MPA issued a Report on 4th December 2008 formally recognising that the
ACPO guidance would be followed in fatal shooting investigations.
According to that report, the MPS has commissioned a Gold group under
DAC Hitchcock to develop further guidance and the Directorate of
Professional Standards is developing a new post-incident procedure. I would
simply add my voice to those recommending that clear guidance be given to
ensure that officers should in future prepare early and independent accounts of
any police actions which result in fatal or other serious injuries. Serious
consideration should also be given to audio- and video-recording of post­
incident debriefings.
Sir Michael Wright
6th January 2009
THE CORONERS COURT· 1 TENNIS STREET SOUTHWARK • SE1 1YD
PHONE : 020 7 525 6363 • FAX: 020 7 525 6356