10 Dean Farrar Street
LONDON SW1H 0NY
Telephone: 020 7202 0202
Fax: 020 7202 0200
Email: len.duvall@london.gov.uk
Web: www.mpa.gov.uk
Sir Michael Wright
HM Assistant Deputy Coroner
HM Coroner for the Inner London South
District of Greater London
The Coroners Court
1 Tennis Street
Southwark
LONDON
SE1 1YD
20th February 2009
Dear Sir Michael
Jean Charles de Menezes Inquest: MPA Response to the Section 43
report from the Coroner
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the concerns you had during the
course of the de Menezes Inquest. As you know, the Metropolitan Police
Authority (MPA) has long been concerned that the Metropolitan Police Service
learns all it can from the events of the 21st and 22nd July 2005, so that the
likelihood of such a tragedy occurring again be minimised in the future.
You may be aware that the MPA undertook a scrutiny during 2008, to assess
the extent to which the MPS had addressed the recommendations arising out
of the various investigations (IPCC, HMIC etc.) into the Stockwell shooting.
We published that report in July 2008. A copy is attached for your information.
It should be noted that as it stands, the scrutiny is not finalised, as there were,
at the time a number of questions we were unable to ask, and a number of
witnesses we were unable to interview, given that the Inquest had yet to take
place. The panel has yet to decide how the MPA will deal with these
questions. In respect of the recommendations we have made, a full response
will be presented to our strategic operational policing committee in April 2009,
outlining the progress being made against each of the recommendations.
Please note this has been delayed by a month to allow consideration of the
s43 report.
The panel has reconvened to consider the issues raised in your report and
our response concentrates on the matters of most concern to the Authority.
1
Our investigations confirm that action is being taken but that progress has
been much slower that we would have liked in some areas.
Command Structure
The MPA believes you were right to raise issues around the command
structure. We had concerns during our scrutiny, particularly about how the
‘designated senior officer’ role (DSO) fits with the standard gold/silver/bronze
structure. In light of the Olympics in 2012, it is particularly important that these
issues are addressed.
Our discussions with the MPS confirm that some changes have been made in
response to your report and the recommendations we made last year, in
particular the term DSO is no longer in use. However, progress has been
slow. It is important that the changes made in London do not conflict with
national arrangements, not least because the MPS have national
responsibilities and are required to act in partnership with other forces. We
have heard that movement at the national level is slow. It is our intention to
work with Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary to maintain momentum
in this area.
We acknowledge that the Gold/Silver/Bronze structure remains the most
appropriate command and control structure for policing operations and that it
works best where there are clear terms of reference and there is clarity about
roles and responsibilities. We have heard from the MPS that new guidelines
on command and control are being frequently tested and that a cadre of
ACPO officers is being specifically trained to deal with situations where
extreme threat is present (i.e. imminent threat to life and public safety). This
ACPO officer, if the situation dictates, will sit alongside the silver commander,
but will have sole responsibility for taking critical decisions that may result in a
death. The post has been described to us as that of ‘Silver Tactical
Commander’. We understand the rationale put forward by the MPS for this
i.e. the necessity for the Met’s highest ranking officers to take decisions of this
magnitude not just because of potential consequences, but also in view of the
need to be held accountable in the aftermath. However, in a hierarchical
organisation such as the MPS, the MPA still has concerns that this model may
create confusion for the staff involved in the incident, particularly in terms of
where overall responsibility lies. The MPS have given us assurances that they
can overcome these potential risks, but only time will tell if this is borne out in
practice.
Communications systems:
You may be aware that since the 22nd of July 2005, the radio system available
to MPS officers, particularly to officers from Specialist Operations and covert
surveillance officers has been upgraded and so many of the problems that
occurred on 22/7 would not occur again today. That said, the Authority
remains concerned about the capacity of Airwave to cope in a major incident.
2
The National Policing Improvement Agency is funding improvements to the
underground capacity and we are aware of plans to ensure the facilities above
ground are fit for purpose. Our Olympics sub-committee has a particular
interest in ensuring progress and we will therefore be asking them to monitor
progress.
Rules of engagement and code-words:
The MPA has scrutinised the progress the MPS has made in clarifying the
rules of engagement for armed surveillance and firearms officers and the
training and testing that is being provided to officers. We are confident that the
MPS has learnt lessons in this area from 22nd July 2005.
We are aware that the MPS are concerned about your recommendation to
introduce a system of code words. We support their concerns, not least
because of the potential risks when operating with colleagues from other
police services. In our view, it is the clarity of command that is important, not
necessarily the words used.
Surveillance officers / Firearms officers:
We have been updated on the progress being made to develop better working
relationships between firearms and surveillance teams, including joint training
exercises. We are aware the MPS have looked at whether some surveillance
officers should be trained to the level of specialist firearms officers to perform
stops on suspected suicide bombers. We accept their contention that training
and abstraction burden they would experience as a result would be
impractical and that other solutions aimed at ensuring appropriately skiled
officers are available in a timely manner would be more appropriate. We will
be seeking regular progress reports to ensure that these concerns are being
addressed.
Miscellaneous issues:
The MPA echoes your concerns about the weaknesses in record keeping and
in some respects this reflects concerns we raised about whether control
rooms were fit for purpose. There has been considerable investment in the
control room environment since 2005, so that activity can be properly
recorded.
As you note in your report, the MPA raised serious concerns about the
practice of police officers writing up their notes together after a serious
incident and our report made several recommendations in this area. The MPA
does recognise that some progress has been made, largely as a result of
changes to the ACPO guidance in this area, and in a recent shooting in
Romford, the new guidance was successfully followed. Nevertheless we still
have serious concerns, firstly about whether there are processes in place to
ensure that compliance can be audited and secondly that the guidance only
3
applies to death and serious injuries involving police officers. We remain of
the view that our recommendations in this area should be fully implemented
by the Met without further delay.
As I say at the start of this letter, the MPA and the MPS are committed to
ensuring that every opportunity for organisational learning from the tragic
shooting is maximised and we will continue to do what we can to ensure that
this learning is embedded.
Yours sincerely
Len Duvall, AM, OBE
Chair, MPA Stockwell Scrutiny Panel
4