Inquest into the death of Jean Charles de Menezes
Metropolitan Police Commissioner’s response to the Rule 43 Report
Introduction
1. On 7th January 2009 the Metropolitan Police Service (the MPS) received
the Coroner’s report pursuant to Rule 43 of the Coroners Rules 1984 (as
amended by the Coroners (Amendment) Rules 2008) (the Report). The
Report contains the Coroner’s views on which MPS systems and practices
should be reviewed in light of the evidence given at the inquest into the
death of Jean Charles de Menezes which concluded on 12th December
2008.
2. In paragraph 4 of the Report, the Coroner stated that within 56 days of the
date of the Report, the Commissioner and the Metropolitan Police
Authority (the MPA) are required to ‘provide a written response
containing - (a) details of any action that has been taken or which it is
proposed will be taken in response to the report or otherwise; or (b) an
explanation as to why no action is proposed.’
3. Therefore, further to paragraph 4 of the Report, this response on behalf of
the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, addresses each of the Coroner’s
concerns in the order they appear in the Report.
4. In addition to addressing these concerns, it is important to emphasise that
since the tragic shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes the MPS has
carefully reviewed (and continues to do so) its operating procedures in an
attempt to ensure, as far as possible, that this type of incident does not
reoccur.
5. Any future terrorist activity will undoubtedly cross police force
boundaries. It is sensible and expected that police forces provide a co-
ordinated response to incidents which could involve simultaneous attacks
in a number of locations. To ensure consistency across forces to enable
effective management of all Counter-Terrorism incidents, including those
of a smaller scale affecting just one force and those larger more complex
operations involving multiple forces, the MPS is leading a national
“Counter Terrorism Interoperability Project”. This will ensure national
consistency in the areas of: command and control; firearms; surveillance;
control rooms; and, technical support.
6. The MPS recognises that much of the learning from July 2005 is not just
relevant to London and is, through both the Counter Terrorism
Interoperability Project and through representation on national working
groups, ensuring that this learning is being considered during the revisions
to relevant Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) Manuals (e.g.
Manual of Guidance on the Police Use of Firearms and the Surveillance
Manual) in an attempt to disseminate the learning throughout the UK.
7. The statement of Commander Stewart referred to in paragraph 6 of the
Report details the many reviews, reports and subsequent work that the
MPS has undertaken internally. In paragraph 6 of the Report the Coroner
states that it is apparent that the MPS has made efforts to resolve a number
of the problems which are identified in his Report, but that there are some
matters that remain to be addressed. Each of the Coroner’s concerns has
been addressed in order in the following paragraphs.
(1) Command Structure
(a) Gold / Silver / Bronze Structure
Concern
8. The Report raises the concern that it was unclear precisely to what extent
the Gold Commander was required to supervise the operation after setting
the strategy. In addition, there was argument in the Inquest as to the
freedom of the Silver Commander to adjust or refine the Gold strategy.
The Report suggests that the MPS might usefully review the command
structure and the ACPO Manual of the Police Use of Firearms, and
consider whether there can be further clarification of the continuing role
played by the Gold Commander after setting his strategy.
Response
9. The MPS is contributing to a revised ACPO Manual of Guidance on the
Police Use of Firearms (to be called the ACPO Manual of Guidance on the
Management, Command and Deployment of Armed Officers (the ACPO
2
Manual 2009)1). The guidance given in the current draft of the ACPO
Manual 2009, in relation to the Gold and Silver Commanders’
responsibilities, is broadly similar to the guidance given in the current
ACPO Manual (the April 2006 version).
10. The current draft of the ACPO Manual 2009 outlines that the Gold
Commander MUST set, review, communicate and update the strategy
based on the threat assessment, should maintain a strategic overview and
must remain contactable by the Silver Commander.
11. The current draft of the ACPO Manual 2009 outlines that the Silver
Commander is responsible for developing and co-ordinating the tactical
plan in order to achieve the strategy set by the Gold Commander. It
envisages that the Gold Commander’s maintenance of the strategic
overview will mean that strategies are developed to adapt to changing
circumstances.
12. However, the MPS considers that the Gold, Silver and Bronze terminology
may not be flexible enough in operations which are particularly complex,
where the firearms element is but one part of a much wider operation, and
which therefore may require responsibility for the firearms functions to be
given to other officers. The MPS is working to influence national
guidance on this issue.
13. Because of the need for a common approach to the command of firearms
operations across all police forces, the MPS must continue to use the terms
Gold, Silver and Bronze Commanders. However, the Gold Commander
must consider the implementation of a command protocol at the outset of
those more complex cases, outlining who has responsibility for handling
each aspect of that operation.
14. Command responsibilities are embedded in MPS firearms command
training and are tested in exercise.
15. To assist officers involved in complex Counter-Terrorism operations to
understand which officers are responsible for each function, within the
1 This revised Manual is anticipated for publication by June 2009 and is currently in draft form out for
consultation with police forces in England and Wales
3
Control Room the command structure (with officer names identified) is
displayed on screens alongside the strategy set by the Gold Commander.
(b) Maintenance of Chain of Command
Concern
16. The Report requested that consideration is given to ensuring that, in major
operations, the chain of command is maintained when a Gold or Silver
Commander is absent (i.e. by nominating interim replacements).
Response
17. The ACPO Manual 2009 outlines the requirement to consider issues
relating to continuity of command during extended operations and that the
Gold Commander is responsible for the overall resourcing of an operation.
18. The MPS accepts the need to maintain the chain of command throughout
lengthy operations – this means replacement of key commanders to allow
for periods of rest and adequate handovers (appropriately documented).
This has been re-emphasised in practical exercises and in the training
given to officers and will be included in an MPS command and control
policy document due for internal release during 2009. This policy will
complement the work being undertaken in the area of command and
control by the Counter Terrorism Interoperability Project referred to in
paragraph 5 above.
19. During 2009/2010 the MPS is moving towards a dedicated team (a cadre)
of officers to command firearms operations (including officers responsible
for setting and reviewing the strategy and carrying it out) on a full time
basis. Creating such a cadre has to be a carefully considered and staged
process to ensure that only trained and appropriately experienced officers
will perform command functions – particularly in complex and high-risk
operations. The MPS will make sure that the introduction of such a cadre
does not negatively impact upon specialist crime operations. An
appropriately resourced cadre will prevent commanding officers having to
work for excessive periods in charge of high-risk firearms operations and
will allow for the smooth hand-over between cadre officers in the chain of
command.
4
(c) DSO
Concern
20. The Report outlines in relation to the role of the DSO (Designated Senior
Officer), the concern that all officers should know (i) when the DSO
becomes involved in commanding an operation and (ii) precisely what
command role he performs. The Report queries whether the DSO is to
assume command from the start, or only to step in when an armed
intervention is required.
Response
21. The MPS no longer uses the term DSO. Every firearms operation has a
tactical firearms commander - recognised both in title and role in the
ACPO Manual 2009. In the MPS, in cases of an emerging extreme threat
(e.g. a suspected suicide bomber), the tactical command role will be
assumed by a specially trained senior level officer (called the “Extreme
Threat Tactical Commander”).
22. Extreme Threat Tactical Commanders are now trained to state to Control
Room staff the reason for their appearance in the Control Room, i.e. to
announce what role they are performing – for example, a passive role of
reviewing intelligence and not being in the command chain or having been
appointed to take responsibility for tactical decision-making relating to the
emerging extreme threat. Where an Extreme Threat Tactical Commander
takes responsibility for tactical decision-making, they are trained to ensure
that this is communicated to officers on the ground in addition to those in
the Control Room.
23. The role of this Extreme Threat Tactical Commander is not to manage the
entire operation but to identify and deal with the emerging threat in
accordance with the strategy. They will monitor emerging threats, will be
appointed to take tactical command when a credible threat becomes
apparent and will determine the tactical response appropriate to the threat.
24. As stated in paragraph 5 above, the Counter Terrorism Interoperability
Project will ensure national consistency in command and control. This
will specifically include consistency in the Extreme Threat Tactical
Command role through training accredited by the National Policing
5
Improvement Agency (the NPIA) and a structured national exercising
programme.
(2) Communications Systems
(a) – (d) Radio Operation and Maintenance / Radio Coverage above Ground /
Radio Coverage Underground / Communication between Teams
Concern
25. The Report highlighted concerns regarding communications – in particular
in relation to the Cougar radio system in operation on 22 July 2005. The
concerns included:
a. difficulties in operating specific police radios;
b. poor coverage and radio black spots (including no underground
facility);
c. undue reliance on mobile telephones; and
d. the general need for an effective radio system allowing communication
between different branches of the MPS engaged in the same operation.
Response
26. The MPS considers that the introduction of covert ‘Airwave’ radios
(replacing the Cougar radios) addresses the above concerns. The
technology to provide adequate levels of security on the covert Airwave
system (as opposed to the non-covert Airwave system) was not available
until 2006. The roll-out of the covert Airwave system within the MPS was
completed by mid-May 2008. The new system addresses the 'range'
problems experienced with the Cougar system. Secure communications are
achievable between different MPS departments (including Control Rooms)
and with other police forces and Agencies.
27. The NPIA has completed its roll-out of the Airwave radio network to all
125 sub-surface underground stations. This extension to the covert
Airwave network provides officers with the ability to communicate with
colleagues and other emergency services. Radio coverage is now available
in all areas of the station below ground that are open to the public, such as
platforms, escalators and booking halls.
6
28. There is also extensive tunnel coverage and by autumn 2009 the project to
complete Airwave network coverage in all tunnels is scheduled to be
complete.
29. In conclusion, the MPS considers that the introduction of the covert
Airwave radio system addresses the difficulties highlighted by the
Coroner’s concerns. In particular, the use of effective radios should
reduce the need for officers to use mobile telephones to simply relay
information to their colleagues. However, as the Report points out in
paragraph 14, mobile telephones may be appropriate for confidential
communications between particular officers.
(e) Language
Concern
30. The Report includes a concern in relation to the way officers use police
terminology and the need to ensure that all officers have the same
understanding of what this terminology means.
Response
31. The MPS recognises the need for definitive terms for use in joint
surveillance and firearms operations to ensure consistency and clarity of
understanding across police forces. The MPS is currently contributing to
the creation of a national glossary of terms relating to the command and
control of operations involving surveillance and firearms with a view to its
formal adoption as a national standard for use across police forces.
32. The use of terminology in relation to identifying persons under
surveillance is addressed within the ‘Identification’ section below.
(3) Radio Discipline
(a) – (b) The Speaker Announcing Himself / Acknowledging Messages
Concern
33. The Report includes concerns in relation to how officers use the radios and
in particular:
a. the failure of speakers giving important announcements to identify
themselves; and
7
b. there was no system for ensuring that officers acknowledged a message
/ question – silence can mean they cannot answer the question or they
didn’t hear the question.
Response
34. The MPS surveillance training, both in July 2005 and now, emphasises the
need for brevity of communication during a surveillance operation.
Training includes that when a surveillance officer takes over the
surveillance commentary of a subject, it is announced over the covert radio
who that officer is. From that point onwards all the commentary on the
subject will be coming from that officer. The training also emphasises that
irrespective of rank or status, no other officer will transmit a message
without asking permission of that officer. If an officer makes this request,
they will identify themselves at the point of making the request.
35. Each surveillance team will have a dedicated loggist who will be following
the surveillance commentary and recording material surveillance
information and attributing this information to the relevant surveillance
officers. At the end of the operation, the surveillance team will review the
surveillance log to ensure that it accurately records who said what and
when.
36. In addition to the surveillance log completed by the loggist, MPS
surveillance policy issued in August 2008 now requires the surveillance
team leader to complete a “Surveillance Management Record” during the
surveillance operation, which is aimed at providing a sequential record of
the administration of the surveillance operation. This record will provide
an audit trail for identification issues relating to the subject(s) under
surveillance. This will include what level of identification has been
achieved, when and why.
37. Further information on identification issues has been included below in
response to other concerns included in the Report.
38. In relation to acknowledging messages, the training teaches that a question
or instruction to all surveillance officers will not be automatically
acknowledged by every officer individually – to do otherwise may disrupt
the surveillance commentary. One officer will indicate that they have
heard the message and therefore that a successful transmission has taken
8
place. Common practice is that if the message is not acknowledged at all,
it will be repeated. The better quality radio equipment discussed above
provides additional confidence that all messages should be heard
throughout the surveillance team.
39. Surveillance radio discipline and procedures are continually assessed
throughout the surveillance training course.
(4) Location Information
(a) – (b) Maps in the Control Room / Use of Maps to Assess Surveillance Plot
Concern
40. The Report suggests that guidance should be given in relation to
displaying maps in the Control Room and attempts to plot the approximate
locations of different teams.
41. Furthermore, the Report suggests that guidance is given to Gold and Silver
Commanders that, in surveillance-based operations, the Geographia and /
or other maps should be checked to ascertain the nature of the premises
under surveillance.
Response
42. The MPS now has the technology to display a variety of maps (showing
different types of information) within the Control Room and commanding
officers are aware of this capability. There are a number of MPS staff
trained in the use of mapping technology in both the Crime and Counter-
Terrorism Control Rooms. This technology has been tested in exercise
and is now commonly used in live operations.
43. The MPS is currently testing a new Counter-Terrorism Control Room
which incorporates technology enabling tactical commanders to display
maps over-laid with detailed information (e.g. the position of relevant
addresses (and the nature of premises) and officers) on large screens.
44. Ongoing developments in Control Room technology are being co-
ordinated through the Counter Terrorism Interoperability Project to
achieve national consistency.
9
(c) Transferring Imagery
Concern
45. The Report speculates that developing technology may allow officers on
the ground to transfer to the Control Room visual imagery of important
locations. This may assist in directing surveillance and firearms officers.
Response
46. The MPS has developed a range of technologies to allow the transfer of
visual imagery from locations on the ground to the Control Room. This
includes some access to CCTV feeds owned by 3rd parties. The tactical
firearms command course (for officers who command high-risk
intelligence led covert operations involving firearms) includes awareness
training on the existence and capabilities of these technologies.
(d) Tracker Technology
Concern
47. The Report suggests that it may be possible in future for GPS/tracker
technology to be used to ascertain the positions of vehicles engaged in
surveillance or pursuit and to display those positions on screens in the
Control Room.
Response
48. The MPS has initiated a project to provide a means for enabling Control
Room staff to monitor and display the changing locations of firearms and
surveillance officers in appropriate operations. The project intends to
implement this technology during 2009.
(5) Identification
Concern
49. The Report expresses a concern that procedures for making and
communicating identifications should be reviewed.
(a) Terminology
50. In particular, the Report indicated that clear terminology ought to be used
to indicate the level of confidence with which a particular identification is
made.
10
Response
51. The MPS recognises that the effective identification of an individual who
is the subject of a surveillance operation is crucial, not only to the success
of an operation but also to ensure that all necessary steps are taken
effectively to manage the safety of that individual, the public and
surveillance operatives. To assist with this objective, the MPS has
enhanced the national identification system. The detail of the system used
is sensitive. However, in short a small part of the system formalises
identification of subjects by putting them into three general categories:
a. Positive identification (where the operative has either personal
knowledge of the subject or is making a judgment based on an honestly
held belief arising from all the information available (e.g. descriptive
characteristics / visual imagery));
b. Possible identification (where there is insufficient information
available for the operative to make a positive or negative identification
(e.g. where there is no photograph or other media available and the
operative does not know the subject));
c. Negative identification (where there is sufficient information for an
operative to make a judgment based on an honestly held belief that a
person under surveillance is not the subject).
52. The MPS recognises that in particular circumstances achieving a positive
or negative identification quickly can be very difficult. The system
developed to assist identification includes not just the provision of
photographs but the use of background intelligence to support the
subjective view of a surveillance officer that the person under surveillance
is or is not the subject of the operation.
(b) Use of photographs
Concern
53. The Report indicated that consideration should be given to advising
officers to take photographs of the subjects of the operation with them
unless particular circumstances dictate otherwise.
11
Response
54. This issue is currently being reviewed and guidance will be issued to
officers in a revision to surveillance policy.
(c) Provision of photographs
Concern
55. The Report suggests that the following topics should be reviewed to assist
the MPS in identification of subjects in intelligence-led operations:
a. how to ensure that other agencies can be contacted (day or night) to
obtain further photographs and information about suspects;
b. what guidance should be given on reviewing files of related operations
to obtain further information on suspects; and
c. what guidance should be given on the use of photographs obtained
from crime scenes to aid identification.
Response
56. The MPS does have 24-hour access to many agencies to assist with
acquiring photographs and background information. Access does vary
between different agencies – especially in terms of length of time between
the request and receipt of the information (which differs between office
hours and non-office hours access). The MPS is reviewing how we can
achieve quicker and better access.
57. In relation to reviewing files of related operations to obtain further
information on subjects, the MPS is conducting a review of the use of
intelligence (especially photographic intelligence) throughout the MPS to
support identification of subjects. In 2005 the MPS set up a dedicated unit
within the Counter Terrorism Command to review and collate
photographic intelligence.
58. In relation to guidance on the use of photographs obtained at crime scenes
to aid identification, the MPS has included in the surveillance policy
document (August 2008) more detail on the use of photographs to brief
surveillance teams. The policy makes clear that it is the responsibility of
the operational team to declare the provenance (source and reliability) of
any photographs or media presented at the briefing. There is an emphasis
12
on the use of photographs, such as those taken at police stations following
a person’s arrest, where identity has been confirmed.
59. However, it is recognised by the MPS that surveillance officers
particularly should be given the best images available (bearing in mind the
fast-moving nature of some operations) to enable them to make an
identification. Guidance on the necessity to consider the best images
available will be incorporated in a revision to MPS surveillance policy
during March 2009. This may include photographs recovered from crime
scenes – however, with the necessary warning about any lack of
provenance.
(d) Transmission of Photographs
Concern
60. The Report suggests that developments in technology may make it
possible in future for surveillance officers to take photographs covertly and
to transmit them to a Control Room and also for photographs to be
transmitted from the Control Room to surveillance officers.
Response
61. The MPS is now able to transfer images of subjects and persons under
surveillance between officers on the ground and the Control Room.
However, this facility is currently limited to specific departments within
the MPS where an assessment has been made that the high-risk to life
outweighs the risk of sensitive information being intercepted or lost.
There is an ongoing project to trial equipment with higher levels of
security that has recently become available and which is capable of wider
information dissemination - for eventual use across all relevant MPS
departments.
(6) Rules of Engagement and Code-Words
(a) Rules of Engagement
Concern
62. In relation to “Rules of Engagement”, the Report suggests that the MPS
considers giving guidance to officers in relation to the following areas:
13
a. providing criteria, or a list of considerations, to assist firearms officers
to decide whether to issue a challenge or to fire a critical shot without
warning;
b. linking criteria to an improved system for designating levels of
identification;
c. devising practical training for firearms officers to assist them in
determining the appropriate response.
Response
63. The MPS recognises that it is important to provide firearms officers with
as much assistance as possible in identifying the criteria / considerations to
take into account when engaging in the very difficult decision-making
required when they confront a suspected suicide terrorist. In relation to
“challenge”, the ACPO Manual 2009 advises that firearms officers should
issue a challenge unless to do so would unduly place any person at risk.
64. Due to the varied situations in which firearms officers may find
themselves, an exhaustive list of considerations, focussed on whether to
issue a warning or not, is not desirable.
65. The MPS considers that officers should engage in a process to assess threat
and risk and then respond accordingly.
66. This process is described in the ACPO Manual 2009 as the Conflict
Management Model. In general terms, this model requires firearms
officers to consider the following:
a. Information / intelligence - the information / intelligence provided to
them (in briefings before and during the operation) and the information
which becomes apparent to them through their own observations;
b. Threat Assessment – use the information they have to make an on-
going assessment of the likelihood and extent of harm being caused by
the person;
c. Powers and policy – make an assessment of the powers (legal) and
policies applicable to the circumstances;
d. Tactical options – deciding which tactical option(s) is the most
appropriate in the circumstances (e.g. wait; take mitigating action;
keep the person under observation; contain the area; challenge);
e. Actions - putting the chosen tactical option into effect.
14
67. The decision on whether to issue a “challenge” is at the tactical option
stage of the process and is informed by the previous stages, accompanied
by an assessment of the risks posed to any person by issuing that
challenge.
68. The “identification” of the person is part of the information / intelligence
stage of the model and the firearms officers’ understanding of the level of
certainty regarding identification should be greatly assisted by the three
levels of identification outlined above.
69. In relation to training, there is ongoing practical training for firearms
officers in the application of the Conflict Management Model. The aim of
this model is to determine an appropriate response to a firearm officer’s
honestly held belief in the circumstances presented to that officer. This
includes training for all firearms officers for circumstances involving
confronting suicide bombers.
70. Specific Counter-Terrorism exercises involving a developing suicide
terrorist threat (which often culminate in a confrontation with a suicide
bomber threat) are regularly conducted and involve the use of Specialist
Firearms Officers (SFOs) (from the MPS Specialist Firearms Command
(CO19)).
(b) Code-Words
Concern
71. The Report endorsed the development of a system of Code-Words to be
used by senior officers to give instructions for firearms officers to take
particular action – for consistent use in: pre-planned; intelligence-led; and
spontaneous situations.
Response
72. The MPS agrees that words of command should be consistent across all
types of police operations. However, after much consideration the MPS
has decided not to use Code-Words with preference to clear words of
command which can be universally understood by all officers and are less
likely to be misinterpreted.
73. The MPS approach to this issue is consistent with the ACPO Manual 2009
which considers the use of plain language to convey critical decisions is
15
important to reduce the potential for confusion. The Manual warns that
care should be taken in respect of the use of Code-Words or complex
descriptors which have the potential to confuse staff involved, i.e. officers
may mistakenly attribute the wrong action to a Code-Word.
74. Therefore, the MPS has revised its procedures for use in suicide bomber
situations and has removed reference to Code-Words to reflect this
conclusion.
(c) Communication of intelligence
Concern
75. The Report highlights the importance of ensuring that intelligence is
communicated to officers on the ground in so far as that is possible. The
Report further states that if a firearms officer is expected to exercise his
own independent judgment before firing a critical shot, he should be kept
informed of what is known about the suspect.
Response
76. The ACPO Manual 2009 makes clear that firearms officers should be
given the fullest briefing possible which should include the intended
course of action and incorporate a range of contingencies that provide
officers with as much clarity as possible as to the role they may have to
undertake. The Manual goes on to emphasise that the Silver Commander
should ensure that the level of threat assessed, the reasons for it, and the
reliability of the information are include in the briefing. There is also a
recognition in the Manual that firearms officers should be continually
updated with relevant information during their deployment.
77. The importance of communicating information and intelligence to officers
“on the ground” is well understood by commanding officers within the
MPS. These officers place a high importance on the need to communicate
information and intelligence through to officers “on the ground”. To assist
with this the MPS is moving towards the issue of secure equipment to all
“on the ground” officers to enable tactical commanders to directly pass
regular briefing documents and photographs. In addition to the use of
covert Airwave radios, this secure equipment should also reduce reliance
on the use of mobile telephones.
16
78. However, the ACPO Manual 2009 also recognises that there may be
circumstances where due to the immediacy and proximity of a threat, there
is not time to update a firearms officer on the unfolding circumstances and
a direction needs to be given to a firearms officer to take decisive action.
This may include a time critical discharge of firearms to protect life.
Furthermore, the Report recognises that, “It may well be impossible to
provide full information to those engaged in a fast-moving operation.”
The MPS procedures for dealing with extreme threats to life take account
of this guidance but recognise that this is an exception to the general
position that all relevant intelligence / information is disseminated.
(7) Surveillance officers / firearms officers
(a) Joint Briefings and Joint Training Operations
Concern
79. The Report emphasised that where possible briefings for firearms officers
and surveillance officers should be held jointly and should be audio or
video recorded to avoid uncertainty about their tone or content arising
later.
80. The Report also suggests that joint training of firearms and surveillance
officers may help them to work together.
Response
81. MPS firearms procedures outline that the general principle for briefings is
that all staff deployed on an operation should be present at the briefings.
The procedures accept that in some exceptional circumstances this will not
be possible. In these circumstances the reasons will be recorded and
where possible alternative arrangements to brief those omitted staff will be
made.
82. All intelligence briefings by Tactical Firearms Commanders to firearms
officers in planned operations are audio-recorded. Following a successful
pilot project, this requirement became policy throughout the whole of the
MPS from the beginning of 2008.
83. In relation to joint training, the MPS conducts a minimum of 6 Counter-
Terrorism exercises per year. The aim of these exercises is to test the
relationship between the Control Room and officers on the ground and to
17
ensure that the surveillance and firearms officers understand each others’
roles and work well together. All SFO teams were involved in this
exercising during 2008. This is in addition to all the exercises
incorporated into regular refresher training for firearms and armed
surveillance officers. Funding has been agreed to expand the capability of
the MPS surveillance training unit to provide an additional rolling
programme of exercises involving all armed surveillance teams with
officers from CO19.
84. In addition, MPS officers participate in a number of other Counter
Terrorism related training exercises (involving surveillance and firearms
teams) throughout the year with other police forces and partner agencies.
85. SFO teams regularly work in support of surveillance officers on non-
Counter Terrorism crime operations and less often in Counter-Terrorism
operations. Therefore, in addition to the exercising, since 2008 Counter-
Terrorism surveillance teams have been increasingly involved in non-
terrorist crime operations specifically to increase their familiarity in
working with SFO teams. From the 1st April 2009 Counter-Terrorism and
Crime surveillance teams will be amalgamated into a single dedicated
surveillance command.
(b) Awareness of other officers
Concern
86. The Report placed importance on ensuring that surveillance, firearms and
arrest teams are aware of each others’ presence and position during the
course of operations e.g. that surveillance officers are informed that
firearms are joining a surveillance plot or that the arrest teams have been
deployed.
Response
87. Command training and Counter-Terrorism exercises emphasise the need to
ensure that officers on the ground are updated as to the addition of other
teams into the operation.
88. The use of better technology (e.g. covert Airwave radio) should assist in
distributing information to officers on the ground during the operation.
18
89. The joint briefings enable officers from each of the teams to understand
which other teams will be involved in the operation and what each team
may be asked to do.
(c) Training of surveillance officers
Concern
90. The Report suggests that consideration might usefully be given to training
at least some armed surveillance officers in how to perform a stop of a
suspected suicide terrorist.
Response
91. The MPS view is that it will always be desirable to use SFOs (the best-
trained firearms officers with specialist weaponry and equipment)
wherever possible to confront suicide terrorists. The MPS is developing
additional training to allow small teams of SFOs to operate within the
surveillance team to support rapid intervention where necessary.
92. However, it is recognised that there may be circumstances where armed
surveillance officers have to use firearms to protect themselves, their
unarmed colleagues and the public as an immediate reaction to the
emergence or presence of a person posing an imminent lethal threat. This
would include the sudden emergence of an extreme threat like a suicide
terrorist.
93. Training for armed surveillance officers has included exercises during
which armed surveillance officers must decide what action to take to
mitigate an emerging extreme threat and where the rationale for the option
chosen (which may be to incapacitate the person) is explored.
94. From April 2009 both the initial firearms training course and subsequent
re-accreditation training for all armed surveillance officers will include an
additional training element to control subjects within the context of a
suddenly emerging extreme threat, such as a suicide terrorist. Within these
courses will be training in how to engage, challenge or incapacitate a
suicide terrorist where it becomes necessary in response to such a suddenly
emerging extreme threat, considering the weapons available to them and
the environment in which they are operating.
19
(8) Other points of concern
(a) Recording of Briefings and Control Room Activity
Concern
95. The Report suggests that consideration might be given to recording at least
some briefings and Control Room discussions in important operations.
Response
96. The Counter Terrorism and Crime Operations Rooms (the Control Rooms)
have the capability to audio record radio transmissions, telephone lines and
ambient noise (e.g. room activity including conversations). These rooms
also have the capability of being videoed.
97. Separate from the recordings of firearms briefings (as detailed above),
there is some capability for briefing rooms attached to the Control Rooms
to be audio and video recorded.
98. All recording facilities will be activated when an extreme threat emerges.
On-going work
99. The MPS recognises that it may be desirable to increase the use of
recording facilities to other operations. However, the MPS is mindful of
the cost implications of recording this information, the subsequent
obligations to convert this information into evidence (further to the
requirements laid down by the Criminal Procedures and Investigations Act
1996) and also the need for nationwide consistency. As stated in
paragraph 5 above, Serious Crime and Counter Terrorism operations are
rarely confined to the boundaries of one police force. Therefore, the MPS
is currently engaged in a national review in relation to this subject. This
review is looking at:
a. the scope of the recording (i.e. what exactly do we need to capture);
b. the equipment capability (i.e. whether the equipment can in fact
capture the required information - the quality of the recording can be
poor in relation to ambient recording because of the busy operating
environment);
c. the management of the product (i.e. whether relevant information can
be identified and transcribed); and
20
d. the extent of the use of the recording equipment (i.e. whether we
should have the recording facilities switched on all the time and if not,
which operations we should be recording).
(b) Preparation of Notes / Statements
Concern
100. Following the cross-examination of the officers at the inquest, the recent
case of R (Saunders) v IPCC [2008] EWHC 2372 Admin and the recent
ACPO guidance on the making of post-incident notes, in the Report the
Coroner added his voice, “…to those recommending that clear guidance be
given to ensure that officers should in future prepare early and independent
accounts of any police actions which result in fatal or other serious
injuries.” The Report also suggests that serious consideration should also
be given to audio / video recording of post-incident debriefings.
Response
101. On 24th October 2008 the Chief Constable's Council proposed and
accepted an amendment to the provisions falling within the current ACPO
Manual of Guidance on the Police Use of Firearms stating as follows:
"As a matter of general practice officers should not confer with others
before making their accounts (whether initial or subsequent accounts). The
important issue is to individually record what their honestly held belief of
the situation was at the time force was used. There should be no need for
an officer to confer with others about what was in their mind at the time
force was used. If, however, in a particular case a need to confer on other
issues does arise, then, in order to ensure transparency and maintain
public confidence, where some discussion has taken place, officers must
document the fact that this has taken place, highlighting the time, date and
place where conferring took place, the issues discussed, with whom and
the reasons for such discussion. There is a positive obligation on officers
involved to ensure that all activity relating to the recording of accounts is
transparent and capable of withstanding scrutiny.”
102. In response, the MPS has adopted this principle and has issued interim
instructions to armed commands in relation to how to implement this in
practice. The MPS firearms procedures will be updated following
21
finalisation and publication of the ACPO Manual 2009 and the instruction
relating to note-making and conferring will be included.
103. However, the MPS believes that the whole issue of note-making and
conferring must be related to the need to identify a system that ensures the
most accurate recollection of events is recorded to assist a fair
investigation. Therefore, the MPS and the Police Federation have
commissioned Portsmouth University to conduct scientific research on this
subject.
104. The MPS is also reviewing how the principles in relation to note-making
and conferring should apply to all other cases of police related death and
serious injury.
105. In relation to the suggestion in the Report that serious consideration should
also be given to the audio and video recording of post-incident de-
briefings, the MPS will consider this suggestion further both internally and
through engagement with all relevant parties (e.g. ACPO, the IPCC, the
Police Federation etc).
106. For consistency within the MPS, this issue requires consideration in
relation to all post-incident debriefs relating to all serious incidents (i.e.
firearms, public order, fatal collisions involving police vehicles etc) and
not just the debriefs relating to firearms incidents.
107. In addition, to ensure consistency throughout England and Wales, the
suggestion needs to be addressed throughout all police forces within
England and Wales.
Concluding Comments
108. The inquest into the death of Jean Charles de Menezes provided the
opportunity publicly to examine, in detail, all facets of the police response
to a complex, fast moving and high-risk operation, set against the
background of recent suicide attacks.
109. In his Report the Coroner acknowledges the work already undertaken
within the MPS to resolve some of the issues that were identified before
and during the inquest, however, he also states that some matters remain
unresolved.
22
110. It is right that the public must feel assured that the processes and
procedures adopted by the police are fit for purpose, particularly when
firearms are used. To this end it is important that critical reviews continue,
taking into account all surrounding circumstances.
111. The preceding paragraphs give the current MPS response on the vital areas
identified by the Coroner, however, the work undertaken following the
tragic events of 22nd July 2005 has left a legacy, whereby operational
options are continually reviewed in the light of current threat, intelligence
and available technology. We hope to have identified in this response
where this continual reviewing is currently occurring.
112. The MPS is committed to ensuring that, as far as possible, no other family
has to suffer the anguish experienced by the relatives of Jean Charles de
Menezes.
Commander Moir Stewart (chair of the July Review Group)
for and on behalf of the
Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis Sir Paul Stephenson QPM
20 February 2009
23